---
title: "Prison Labour and the Limits of Reform: Why Minimum Standards Matter"
date: 2026-02-27
layout: single
author_profile: true
tags: [law, prison labour, minimum standards, labour law]
---
Work in prison is often celebrated as a tool for rehabilitation. It is meant to help incarcerated people reintegrate into society, learn skills, and prepare for employment upon release. But how rehabilitative is work that offers no wage protections, no contractual relationship, and limited social security? This post thus asks: what should those minimum standards look like, and why do they matter?

Across much of the world, prisoners are expected to work, yet they are denied the most basic rights of workers. Rather than reintegration, the effect may be further alienation: work without protections could reproduce the same dynamics of exclusion and marginalisation that prisoners have experienced outside prison walls. 

The absence of clear minimum standards can transform prison labour into a form of exploitation rather than rehabilitation. As put by Evans and Goldberg:

(…) prison labour is like a pot of gold. No strikes. No union organising. No health benefits, unemployment insurance, or workers’ compensation to pay. No language barriers, as in foreign countries. New leviathan prisons are being built on thousands of eerie acres of factories inside the walls. Prisoners do data entry for Chevron, make telephone reservations for TWA, raise hogs, shovel manure, and make circuit boards, limousines, waterbeds, and lingerie for Victoria’s Secret, all at a fraction of the cost of ‘free labour.’

While this quote concerns the US, its message is clear: the lack of minimum labour standards puts the rehabilitative objective of prison labour at significant risk, becoming a mechanism for economic extraction.

The 2024 report by the UN Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of slavery, including its causes and consequences, comes at an important time and offers a vital opportunity to rethink how we treat prison labour. The report offers a powerful reminder of how much of today’s prison labour verges on forced labour and highlights that in most countries, employed prisoners (those working inside prison) are excluded from national labour protections. Prisoners are not ‘workers’ or ‘employees’ and thus fall outside national employment legislation – a situation the Rapporteur explicitly recommends amending. 

Notably, the report calls for prisoners who work to be recognised as ‘workers in national legislation and extend labour protection, particularly in areas such as wages, working hours, occupational health and safety and trade union rights’ (A/HRC/57/46, 18, [53]). Yet, many states have instead sought to embed certain rights within penal codes.

Why minimum standards matter: punishment, dignity and reintegration
This exclusion creates both a legal and a moral vacuum. It undermines the principle of normalisation of life in prison, intended to ease prisoners’ reintegration into society once released and alienates them further. Moreover, it sends a confusing message: prison labour is meant to prepare people for life after release, or at least part of its stated aim is to do so, but in practice, we withhold from them some of the very conditions that contribute to making work meaningful and rehabilitative. More fundamentally, it blurs the line between work and punishment. 

The loss of liberty is the punishment. Those that have committed criminal offences must be ‘sent [to prison] as punishment; not for punishment’ (O’Donnell, 2016) Labour must be voluntary as well as purposeful not imposed, and minimum standards are part of the way to making this distinction real. Punishment lies in the deprivation of liberty rather than in the denial of fundamental labour rights.

This distinction also highlights why prisoners should retain fundamental employment rights. Incarceration limits freedom but does not suspend the right to dignity or the right to protection for exploitation. If the state requires or permits prisoners to work, as it views work as an avenue for rehabilitation, it must also uphold the protections that give work legitimacy. Otherwise, labour becomes an extension of punishment, rather than a means to rehabilitation.

Additionally, the exclusion not only enables coercion and damages rehabilitative hopes but also distorts the very purpose of work. If work is meant to support reintegration, then it must be governed by clear standards. Without these, we risk turning work into extraction rather than preparation, further alienating prisoners and obscuring the line between punishment and rehabilitation.

What minimum standards?
Drawing upon international instruments, comparative practice as well as the Special Rapporteur’s recommendations, a core set of minimum standards should include the following: 

1)	Voluntariness and informed consent in writing (including a contract of employment, French prisoner employment contract example)
2)	Fair wages (a closer alignment of wages to those on the outside for the same job as is the case in Italy where prisoners receive ‘two-thirds of the pay for the same job in the open and free market’) (A/HRC/57/46, 8, [23]).
3)	Provision of social security benefits (i.e. employer and employee contributions)
4)	Occupational safety and health protections (akin to those of outside workers as is the case in France, as provided by Article L412-20-1 of the Penitentiary Code).
5)	Labour inspection (public supervision and control that is ‘effective, systematic and regular and should be considered a matter for the services of government labour inspectors’) (CEACR, 2007, 65, [112]).

Together, these standards move us somewhat closer to what International Labour Organisation’s Committee of Experts (CEACR) has interpreted would help fall outside the definition of forced labour under the Forced Labour Convention (No. 29). While the CEACR’s comments are made specifically in relation to the involvement of private entities in prison labour, their emphasis on the need for employment conditions of prisoners to ‘approximate [those] of a free labour relationship’ (44, [132]) and ensure that these are ‘not so disproportionately lower than the free market that it could be characterised as exploitative’ (47, [143]) remain highly relevant for in establishing the minimum conditions necessary to ensure that prison labour does not fall within the scope of forced labour.

In practice, however, some states have responded to this challenge by partially adapting labour protections within their penal legislation. This can be seen in the examples below.

Differing practices: France, Germany and England & Wales
Within its Penitentiary Code, France has developed quite significant specific prison labour rights, ranging from a contract of employment for prisoners (Articles L-412-10 to L412-19), social security benefits (for example, Articles L324-3 to L324-5), and protection from discrimination and harassment at work (Articles L412-24 to L412-42). 

Yet, it falls short on wages, with a rate of pay set at 45% of the national minimum wage for production jobs (Article D412-64). Private companies that set up workshops in prisons can pay prisoners up to the minimum wage, though there is no obligation to do so. While there are indications that this may occur in practice, publicly available evidence remains limited.

In Germany, the situation is similar in that certain minimum labour rights are provided, and the Federal Prison Act refers directly to the application of its national labour legislation for occupational safety and health (Section 149) Again, wages remain low, as evidenced by the successful legal challenge in June 2023 at the German Constitutional Court on prison labour wages, which found that current pay levels were incompatible with the principles of human dignity and resocialisation. 

By contrast, England & Wales offers far fewer protections. Prisoners are paid very low wages, occupational safety and health provisions are covered in policy documents, and there is a lack of compensation claim mechanisms for injury at work, as well as limited access to social security benefits for working prisoners. 

Privatisation and prison labour: a risk to minimum standards?
France has increasingly advanced the idea of prison labour as a key element of rehabilitation and reintegration, especially through partnerships with private entities. In line with this ambition, it has set a target of increasing the proportion of prisoners in work from 31% to 50% by 2027. The Ministry of Justice launched a platform known as IPRO 360° to connect private industry with prison workshops. Faced with low rates of prisoner employment, the state provides a range of incentives to private entities to employ these: it leases prison workshop premises free of charge, drafts prisoner employment contracts, and covers pension and unemployment contributions on behalf of employers. 

This signals a broader trend: the growing role of private companies in the prison labour economy. While such partnerships may offer opportunities for expanding access to work, they raise critical questions about the risk of commercial interests driving carceral expansion or the creation of an economic interest in maintaining few labour protections for employed prisoners. Without enforceable benchmarks, the drive for efficiency and profit could override rehabilitative objectives. Striking the right balance between attracting private employers and ensuring that work remains fair and meaningful is crucial if prison labour is to serve more than just economic aims.

Conclusions
On their own, minimum standards cannot guarantee that prison labour is rehabilitative and non-exploitative, yet they are essential to making it fair. Minimum standards are not the end of the story, but the starting point for any fair and rehabilitative models of prison labour. They provide a baseline against which we can judge whether prison labour supports reintegration or reinforces exclusion and whether it serves justice or perpetuates inequality. As the Special Rapporteur rightly insists, we must begin recognising prisoners as workers. Doing so requires more than legal reform; it demands a confrontation with the economic and political interests embedded in current prison labour systems. Ultimately, the regulation of prison labour is not only a matter of policy preferences but in fact reflects the social and ethical values that underpin our justice system.
